the predictions about the catastrophe
that is the coronavirus get more ominous
by the day the World Health Organization
says it poses a greater global threat
than terrorism that's bad enough but
what the expert you're about to meet
says is even more terrifying professor
Gabriel Lyon believes 60% of the world's
population could become infected with
the virus and that as many as 45 million
of us might be killed by it now it would
be easy to dismiss the professor as
alarmist except he's the man who'd led
the fight against the SARS virus he
knows what he's talking about we ignore
him at our peril
[Music]
it's not a matter of if but when
Australia streets will look like this
[Music]
it doesn't appear that any country has
been completely successful at 100%
containment and driving it back into the
wild
this is life for the 7 million people of
Hong Kong caught in the crosshairs of
the coronavirus
[Music]
it frightens me
but I think that a little bit of anxiety
will give you that extra bit of
motivation to take precautions
[Music]
a world where people only venture out in
masks where almost all public places are
deserted for fear of infection where
businesses are deserted and economic
markets are in panic and this may only
be to start
there is now an emergency going on and
what we must do is very rigorous
infection control
this is the new normal of possibly the
greatest pandemic the world has ever
seen
[Music]
if coronavirus is the disease X the
world has been fearing then it possibly
began somewhere like this among a colony
of bats
there's sleeping time bombs across the
region right now
[Music]
and then somehow the virus almost
certainly crossed over to humans at
so-called wet markets these are places
all over Asia but particularly China
where wild animals are slaughtered on
site and sold for food I think this is
Mother Nature's revenge
Steven Gayle stirrer is an environmental
and human rights investigator who's been
campaigning for years against Asia's wet
markets governments throughout the
region claim they've shut them down
because of the corona virus pandemic but
here in Bangkok as you'll see we're
about to go undercover to show that's
simply untrue steven is fighting the
corona virus at it's very source to
contain to delay to research and then to
mitigate while this man is leading the
scientific fight against the pandemic at
emergency World Health Organization
meetings all around the world one and a
half percent of that hundred-person
cluster has asymptomatic shedding of a
live virus professor Gabriel the earth
is considered the world's foremost
expert on corona virus based in Hong
Kong he led the global fight against
SARS at first
we heard rumors about a new mysterious
atypical pneumonia sort of brewing on
the mainland was there much fraud in
those days was there of course of course
it was very scary no end in sight to the
SARS crisis visage death toll continues
to rise in November 2002 SARS rampage
through 17 countries infecting over
8,000 people and killing nearly 800
experts say that's just a hint of what
this latest corona virus could do
it is certainly more infective so in and
it's also very difficult to try to
control it and coronavirus or covert 19
as the illness is now being called
spreads far more rapidly than SARS
unchecked as countries like China and
South Korea have discovered the
infection rate becomes exponential
the big unknown now is really how big is
the iceberg so you're guessing there
could be many many more people I don't
know but I'm suspecting that
[Music]
coronavirus has already struck over 80
countries and Counting
professor Liang's prediction for the
eventual extent of the pandemic is
chilling from everything you've learned
over the past weeks and months what is
your best estimate of how many people
around the world could be affected by
this virus don't know everybody is
susceptible and if you assume that
everybody randomly mix with each other
then eventually you will see 40 50 60 %
of the population get infected at
current mortality rates that level of
infection would mean between 45 and 60
million deaths worldwide and that's just
in the first wave of the virus
despite that desperate draconian
lockdown measures being used in China is
the second wave worse than the first
wave do you think don't know but we have
to prepare for that possibility that
there is a second wave as a person and a
scientist does this virus frighten you
every time I know I'm involved in an
epidemic it frightens me
as Australia now prepares to be hit by
the first wave of coronavirus it's worth
looking at the effect that has had on
infected cities like Hong Kong so close
to the epicenter of the outbreak I can
tell you in all the years I've been
coming here this is not normal this is
one of Hong Kong's busiest market
streets and at this time of the day it
is always packed jammed teeming
shoulder-to-shoulder with tourists and
shoppers but this is a product of what
public health officials call social
distancing if you don't have to be on
the street if you don't have a good
reason most of these people are going to
the subway on either end then simply
stay home
[Music]
all over Hong Kong the impacts of this
city battling its deadly unseen enemy
are everywhere shopping malls deserted
amusement parks shut down or attended by
the very few mandatory temperature
checks before entering restaurants they
do this to all the customers do 30 born
on 7 degrees and once inside perspex
screens to shield the patrons
on the streets the elderly line up for
free handouts of masks and hand
sanitizer most shops are selling little
else
and where people are forced to
congregate like the subway system
everyone wears a mask the people of Hong
Kong have accepted the new world of the
coronavirus don't have much choice
really but this is the reality if you're
in close proximity has been for weeks
now since the outbreak began across the
border in China the question is are
Australians ready and willing to take
the extreme measures necessary to avoid
infection
with so many people here on the streets
wearing masks can you see the same sort
of culture being played out on the
streets of Australia Hong Kong has have
lived through SARS and one of the first
thing they did was go out and buy masks
there's been a month-long shortage of
them ever since
Tom Grundy is editor of Hong Kong Free
Press and a longtime resident who doubts
whether populations in Australia and
other Western countries will respond to
coronavirus in the unified way people
here have the course yet people are very
disciplined about keeping this virus
under control goodness knows how you
know other perhaps less disciplined
places who haven't lived through
something like this are going to go but
according to Tom there's a much darker
dimension to the corona virus outbreak
he says there's deep suspicion here that
a major reason it became a pandemic is a
massive state cover-up ordered by
China's President Xi Jinping including
arresting the whistleblowing doctor who
later died this is the G Jinping virus
not the cause of it but certainly the
breadth of the outbreak is because of
the authoritarianism and the lack of
press freedom in the mainland there was
no mechanism for anyone to raise the
alarm about this the one doctor you know
who tried to in the early days and
ultimately succumb to the disease was
was detained and told to shut up public
health crises and closed secretive
governments don't really go together do
they right they've even admitted that
you know they've changed the way they
collect data a couple of times so a very
tough do you think the death toll
numbers that they're reporting a record
there is a lot of pressure in China for
things to get back to normal the economy
is suffering so I think you know it
would be reasonable to think that there
is some malarkey with with the figures
but you know it's a black box
[Music]
we are in unchartered territory one
measure of China's influence is the
pressure it has put on the World Health
Organization to not officially call the
corona virus outbreak a pandemic but on
that front the man at the center of it
is blood why is there a blockage with
that why was the w-h-o reluctant to call
it a pandemic well technically it is I
suspect that it may be because
colleagues may think that if they will
use the word pandemic
then it would trigger panic and panic is
no good for any kind of outbreak control
how was this virus born what was the
mechanism that gave birth to it probably
is you're not a jump that is from a
small mammal likely reared or captured
at least for food consumption
[Music]
the reservoir appears to be about coming
up undercover penguins have been high on
the menu for a while in an illegal
wildlife market highest risk during the
handle process is this where the
coronavirus jump from an animal to a
person was born that's the lesson here
that's next on 60 minutes so that will
work well as you turn your head you'll
be able to film Steve and I I'm with
Steven gal stirrer and environmental and
human rights investigator based in
Thailand where this we've got the the
lenses in the backpack right we're
getting ready for an undercover
operation using secret cameras so this
should work quite well for us this just
all tucks away in here our target an
illegal wildlife market in Bangkok
places like this and so-called wet
markets where wild animals are sold for
food away coronavirus first jumped from
animals to humans
so in viral terms these things are
really living petri dishes aren't they
yeah there's sleeping time bombs across
the region right now
stopping the zoonotic jump at source is
of course critical in Hong Kong
professor Gabriel the earth is at the
center of the scientific fight against
coronavirus fight that began at a
wildlife market in Wuhan China does the
virus transmitted into humans through
people eating these animals or just
handling them probably the highest risk
during the handling process where you
have animals under stress therefore the
immune system is down and then through
the handling process including slaughter
that's when the highest risk of jumping
from animal to humans would have
occurred experts aren't certain but the
suspicion is that in Wuhan coronavirus
crossed to humans from the most
trafficked wild animal in the world the
Pangolin pangolins
had been high on the menu for a while
whatever it was it was an animal it
jumped from an animal to a person it's a
wild animal that's been taken out of its
natural environment consumed in some way
come into contact with people in an
unnatural way that's the lesson here do
you find a mystifying that you can have
a grandparent dying in an aged care home
in Sydney from an animal that was sold
in a market in China
yeah no it's it's it's incredible I have
to say we're not surprised because we've
been working on this for years we've
been trying to warn people that you know
this is global
we're walking into the heart of Bangkok
cements Chatuchak market to see how
seriously Thailand's authorities are
taking the threat that coronavirus has
so dramatically exposed here in hot
squalid and cramped conditions wild
animals smuggled in from all over the
world I think at this place is a torture
chamber and a filthy laboratory all
makes in the wide from AIDS to SARS and
now the pandemic affecting over 80
countries worldwide most new diseases
infecting mankind are caused by a virus
that began in a wild animal and left to
humans in settings just like this
they've all been pulled from their
natural environment brought thousands of
miles in some cases all the way here and
contaminated condition bringing with
them god knows what with literally
thousands of people here today at the
perfect formerly for the wuhan thing to
happen again right here as part of its
desperate efforts to contain corona
virus china closed over 20,000 wet
markets but wildlife markets like this
are still operating with impunity across
asia run by organized crime syndicates
his syndicates we know who they are
we've been following them for years and
they're still out there and they're not
gonna close down business today because
china you know closed down Wuhan these
are like drug dealers you know you make
it difficult to sell drugs in one
neighborhood they're gonna move to
another
[Music]
huddled in their cages and glass boxes
are everything from Australian cockatoos
even Blue Tongue lizards to African
meerkats European ferrets rare tortoises
and snakes
these animals are never together in the
wild and so are vulnerable to viruses
carried by each other in these terrible
conditions those viruses can pass to the
humans who handle them the next global
pandemic could easily begin in one of
these cages so what are they selling
that the iguana for is that for meat so
you can do whatever you want with it
that'll fast about 150 US dollars then
deep within the market a single shop
that should rightly terrify a world
reeling from coronavirus an african
serval cat a fennec fox from the sahara
and marmosets from south america this is
just incredible
you know African Cats you got monkeys
primates in the same confined space has
no one told these people diptych this is
where the other viruses came from
well we have and we've told them this is
Wuhan in the making number two and so
we're asking them to shut it down
because it's a prescription for disaster
all within this small hot room ready to
inspect somebody is amazing I've seen it
all now yeah
[Music]
so if you want to stop the next pandemic
it's gonna have to be truly a global
attempt to shut these markets down yeah
I mean look corona virus is spreading
all over the world so that should tell
us we need to not just shut down the
markets in China you need to shut them
down in Thailand Indonesia Lao Cambodia
Burma and perhaps other countries as
well otherwise it's going to expand or
recur
[Music]
if our response to the coronavirus
catastrophe is global and it has to be
then surely our response to the deadly
threat posed at the very source of these
viruses must be equally global
this trade as global goes everywhere and
a bad a virus that jumps from one animal
could go you know back to my country or
any other country and I hate to say it
but I think the penguin in this case the
most heavily trafficked mammal in the
world whose only defense is to curl up
into a ball has decided that
conservationists weren't doing enough it
struck back itself I think this is
Mother Nature's revenge
coming up give it all you got fill
everything at it are you ready we have
se health challenge for the fight of
your life for everyday expect to see 80
to 100 cases what Australians must do
designed our ICU with a pandemic mode to
be the corona virus if you are extremely
lucky you might even be able to contain
it that's next on 60 minutes
you have the symptoms of coronavirus
friends family or workmates may have
already been infected whether you live
or die
depends on two things how Australia's
health authorities and hospitals cope
with this pandemic but mainly how old
you are we will be particularly worried
for frail elderly patients who became
unwell with respiratory failure with
this infection associate professor Chris
MacIsaac is director of intensive care
at Royal Melbourne Hospital as
coronavirus gathers force in Australia
he and his staff are on the highest
alert level in modern history we have a
42 bed ICU I think if we needed to
provide intensive care for more than
that number
it wouldn't be business as usual
what do we know about the type of people
who are being killed by this forest each
overriding overriding determinant age
elderly yes in Hong Kong professor
Gabriel Leone is one of the global
scientific leaders in the fight against
coronavirus he says if infected with the
virus people over 65 are 20 times more
likely to die from it than those under
65 let's pray that we will not see a
nursing home or retirement home facility
having the same experience because the
outcomes could be absolutely absolutely
dire tragic news this morning at 95
year-old woman who was living at the age
care facility here losing her life to
coronavirus in Australia the cases are
coming and as Professor Liang has
already witnessed in other countries the
fear is what starts with a few cases
quickly become hundreds and then local
epidemics saw into uncharted territory
now is the time to really pull out all
the stops put everything you got into it
to fight it we have to give it the whole
of government approach give it all you
got throw everything at it quick and
early and hard that will buy you
sufficient time and if you are extremely
lucky you might even be able to contain
it if you're extremely lucky if you are
extremely lucky
we're actually fortunate to have
designed our ICU with a pandemic mode
we've never needed to activate that mode
but that's regularly tested and ready to
go in case we do get an influx of
patients like in hospitals all across
Australia Chris MacIsaac and his senior
intensive care staff at Royal Melbourne
are preparing their emergency pandemic
response for when coronavirus hits hard
so when we push that the whole pod zone
bu- there's a proper anteroom all the
doors are automatically closed and
there's actually an airlock pointer in
three spots
yeah and that's ready to go
we don't know where the cases are going
to emerge in particular and so it's
important that all hospitals have their
pandemic plans activated professor
Kirstie abusing is director for the
Victorian infectious diseases service
they've got someone down there they've
just arrived from Iran and they've got a
full plane yesterday you know they're
they're fair brawl and they're hypoxic
this will require a community response
everybody needs to understand that that
we we are facing a health challenge but
it's a health challenge that together I
think we can overcome and help to limit
the impact
but with australia's death toll from
coronavirus standing it free and around
80 confirmed cases
professor leung warns there must be
dozens possibly hundreds more cases out
there that haven't yet been detected for
every death you would expect to see
eighty to a hundred cases so if you
start seeing deaths before you start
picking up large numbers of cases the
only conclusion that one can reasonably
and scientifically draw is that you
hadn't been testing nearly early enough
or extensively enough unless you go and
test you're not going to find we're
looking at scenarios from the most
benign through to you know some millions
of people being infected over a period
of several weeks with the worst case
scenario of millions being infected in
Australia the risk is that our health
system will become dangerously
overloaded but at least according to
Professor Liang we're better placed to
come through this pandemic than many
other countries around the world if
you've got millions or tens of millions
or hundreds of millions of people who
might actually be infected I fear that
this is going to bring about another
massive instance of health inequity
because this disease actually is only
treatable if you have got ICU beds if
you have got ventilators if you have got
good drugs availability to tie the
people over when they get really sick in
other words you're saying the people who
will survive are only those who can
afford it in health systems that can
afford it
[Music]
hello I'm Sarah abou
thanks for watching to keep up with the
latest from 60 minutes Australia make
sure you subscribe to our channel you
can also download the 9 now app for full
episodes and other exclusive 60 minutes
content